[DataGridPremium] Pivoting (#9877)
mui/mui-x: docs/data/data-grid/pivoting/pivoting.md

Author: > was the rationale behind this to encourage broader adoption?

Yes, also the API is unlikely to change

title: Data Grid - Pivoting
---

# Data Grid - Pivoting [<span class="plan-premium"></span>](/x/introduction/licensing/#premium-plan 'Premium plan')

<p class="description">Rearrange rows and columns to view data from multiple perspectives.</p>

The Data Grid Premium's pivoting feature lets users transform the data in their grid by reorganizing rows and columns, creating dynamic cross-tabulations of data.
This makes it possible to analyze data from different angles and gain insights that would be difficult to see in the default grid view.

:::success
If you're new to pivoting, check out the [Understanding pivoting](/x/react-data-grid/pivoting-explained/) page to learn what pivoting is and how it works through interactive examples.
:::

> 

Reviewer: It'd benefit the users by communicating this IMO. (The last two assume my other comment is accepted)
```suggestion

:::warning
Pivoting does some computations and overrides certain props based on those computations.
When pivot mode is active, these props will be ignored: `rows`, `columns`, `rowGroupingModel`, `aggregationModel`, `getAggregationPosition`, `columnVisibilityModel`, `columnGroupingModel`, `groupingColDef`, `headerFilters`, `disableRowGrouping`, and `disableAggregation`.
:::

```

Reviewer 2: iterating on the copy above - I would avoid describing props as "user-provided" since they're more like "developer-provided" (as opposed to "end user-provided"), and we're generally speaking to "you the developer."

```suggestion

:::warning
Pivoting performs certain computations and uses them to override corresponding props.
When pivot mode is active, the following props are ignored: `rows`, `columns`, `rowGroupingModel`, `aggregationModel`, `getAggregationPosition`, `columnVisibilityModel`, `columnGroupingModel`, `groupingColDef`, `headerFilters`, `disableRowGrouping`, and `disableAggregation`.
:::

```

## Quick start

Pivoting is enabled by default and can be accessed through the icon in the toolbar.
In the demo below, the pivot panel is already open and some pivoting parameters have been set.
Use the **Pivot** switch at the top of the panel to toggle pivoting off and on.
You can drag and drop existing columns in the **Rows**, **Columns**, and **Values** dropdown menus to change how the data is pivoted.

> {{"demo": "GridPivotingMultipleValues.js", "bg": "inline", "defaultCodeOpen": false}}

Reviewer: Debatable nitpick. I'd keep the demos with colored markings on the "Understanding pivoting" page since the primary purpose, as I see it, is to help users grasp how pivoting works.

Author: This is an unplanned side-effect because one demo is used in 2 places 😅
There should be no color highlights on the main doc page, I'll fix that 👍🏻

Author: Fixed https://deploy-preview-9877--material-ui-x.netlify.app/x/react-data-grid/pivoting/#quick-start

## Controlled pivoting

For fully controlled pivoting state, you can use the following props:

- Pivot model:
  - `pivotModel`: Controls the current pivot configuration.
  - `onPivotModelChange`: Callback fired when the pivot model changes.
- Pivot mode toggle:
  - `pivotActive`: Controls whether pivot mode is active.
  - `onPivotActiveChange`: Callback fired when the pivot mode changes between active and inactive.
- Pivot panel:
  - `pivotPanelOpen`: Controls whether the pivot panel is open.
  - `onPivotPanelOpenChange`: Callback fired when the pivot panel is opened or closed.

{{"demo": "GridPivotingControlled.js", "bg": "inline", "defaultCodeOpen": false}}

## Using fields in the pivot model multiple times

While this is not supported yet, we are working to bring this feature to the Data Grid.

## Disable pivoting

To disable pivoting, set the `disablePivoting` prop to `true`:

```tsx
<DataGridPremium disablePivoting />
```

## Derived columns in pivot mode

In pivot mode, it's often useful to group data by a year or quarter.
The Data Grid automatically generates year and quarter columns for each **Date** column for this purpose.

> For example, the sales dataset we've been using throughout the examples has a **Quarter** column.

Reviewer 2: to avoid talking about "we/us"

```suggestion
For example, the sales dataset used throughout the examples has a **Quarter** column.
```

> But often in real-world datasets, each sale record would have a precise **Transaction Date** field, like in the following demo.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
But in a real-world dataset, each sales record would typically have a precise **Transaction Date** field, as in the following demo.
```

The **Transaction Date** column is represented by additional columns in pivot mode: **Transaction Date (Year)** and **Transaction Date (Quarter)**:

> {{"demo": "GridPivotingFinancial.js", "bg": "inline", "defaultCodeOpen": false}}

Reviewer: Setting `min` and `max` functions for "Price" and "Volume" in this demo causes `Infinity` and `-∞`:

![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/cd0c3072-958b-413f-8c05-8b30f9d8184a)

Is it intentional? Having empty values would make more sense to me.

Author: Good question!
Pivoting highlighted this aggregation behavior in some edge cases, and indeed, it's confusing.

We use infinity as initial values in min/max aggregation functions, but I think they shouldn't ever return these initial values:
https://github.com/mui/mui-x/blob/cef14b8bea193dba5460f379ac3b3e49d671f31b/packages/x-data-grid-premium/src/hooks/features/aggregation/gridAggregationFunctions.ts#L46-L54

Author: Done in https://github.com/mui/mui-x/pull/9877/commits/f64494a9dc1e54ce68498042d563fa57c40be19f

Reviewer: Looks better now, thanks!

### Custom derived columns

Use the `getPivotDerivedColumns` prop to customize derived columns.
This prop is called for each original column and returns an array of derived columns, or `undefined` if no derived columns are needed.

{{"demo": "GridGetPivotDerivedColumns.js", "bg": "inline", "defaultCodeOpen": true}}

## Sticky column groups

Depending on the pivot mode, some column groups might exceed the width of the Data Grid viewport.
To improve the user experience, you can make these column groups "sticky" so that the column group labels remain visible while scrolling horizontally.

You can use the `sx` prop to apply the necessary styles:

```tsx
<DataGridPremium
  sx={{
    '& .MuiDataGrid-columnHeader--filledGroup': {
      '& .MuiDataGrid-columnHeaderTitleContainer': {
        overflow: 'visible',
      },
      '& .MuiDataGrid-columnHeaderTitleContainerContent': {
        position: 'sticky',
        left: 8,
      },
    },
  }}
/>
```

{{"demo": "GridPivotingMovies.js", "bg": "inline", "defaultCodeOpen": false}}

> ## Advanced demo

Reviewer 2: It would be nice to have a sentence or two here to give the reader more context about what's going on in the demo.

> {{"demo": "GridPivotingCommodities.js", "bg": "inline", "defaultCodeOpen": false}}

Reviewer: I’ve noticed a couple of issues related to filtering while in pivot mode:

1. Filtering is limited to “Rows” only (i.e., the first column). However, since all columns appear in the filter panel, it’s reasonable for users to expect filtering to also apply to “Columns” and “Values”.
2. Even when filtering on "Rows", several aggregation cells don’t update properly until they are manually clicked.

   https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/418f3b95-6b6c-4b9e-a414-65ed94499a5e

Would it make sense to disable the filtering in pivot mode until:
- We fix the above-mentioned issues
- We support https://github.com/mui/mui-x/pull/9877#discussion_r1990902488

Let me know what you think!

Author: > Even when filtering on "Rows", several aggregation cells don’t update properly until they are manually clicked.

This should be fixed now.

> Filtering is limited to “Rows” only (i.e., the first column). However, since all columns appear in the filter panel, it’s reasonable for users to expect filtering to also apply to “Columns” and “Values”.

To be accurate, filtering is limited to the original data. The only issue is that the empty columns are still rendered.

> Would it make sense to disable the filtering in pivot mode until:
> We fix the above-mentioned issues
> We support https://github.com/mui/mui-x/pull/9877#discussion_r1990902488

I don't think we should disable filtering, but we'll improve it in the follow-up

Author: > Even when filtering on "Rows", several aggregation cells don’t update properly until they are manually clicked.
> This should be fixed now.

Spoke too soon, as I broke some tests.
But this issue exists without pivoting: https://github.com/mui/mui-x/issues/16823. I'll try to address it separately.

Reviewer: > I don't think we should disable filtering, but we'll improve it in the follow-up

Alright, I added it to the follow-up [issue](https://github.com/mui/mui-x/issues/17295) in that case.

Author: Will be fixed by https://github.com/mui/mui-x/pull/17296

If multiple fields are selected for rows, the rows will be grouped in the order of the selected fields.
For example, if you pivot by `region` and `product` rows, each unique combination of region and product will become a row in your pivot data grid.

### Columns

**Columns** define how your data will be grouped horizontally.
Each unique value in the fields you select for columns will create a new column in the pivot data grid.
For example, if you pivot by `region`, each unique region will become a column in your pivot data grid.

{{"demo": "GridPivotingColumns.js", "bg": "inline", "defaultCodeOpen": false}}

If multiple fields are selected for columns, the columns will be grouped in the order of the selected fields.
For example, if you pivot by `region` and `quarter` columns, each unique combination of region and quarter will become a column in your pivot data grid.

### Values

**Values** define what data will be displayed in the cells of your pivot data grid.
These are typically numeric fields that can be aggregated (summed, averaged, counted, etc.).
For example, you might want to see the sum of `sales` for each combination of row and column.

> {{"demo": "GridPivotingValues.js", "bg": "inline", "defaultCodeOpen": false}}

Reviewer 3: > would it make more sense to make them incremental instead?

I think so. Without rows, the only thing we are demonstrating for 2 and 3 are the fields in the pivot settings sections—would be more helpful to show building a pivot incrementally.

> {{"demo": "GridPivotingValues.js", "bg": "inline", "defaultCodeOpen": false}}

Author: Done https://deploy-preview-9877--material-ui-x.netlify.app/x/react-data-grid/pivoting/#rows

> {{"demo": "GridPivotingValues.js", "bg": "inline", "defaultCodeOpen": false}}

Reviewer 3: Nice, that works a lot better IMO.

title: Data Grid - Pivoting
---

# Data Grid - Pivoting [<span class="plan-premium"></span>](/x/introduction/licensing/#premium-plan 'Premium plan') 🧪

<p class="description">Rearrange rows and columns to view data from multiple perspectives.</p>

The Data Grid Premium's pivoting feature lets users transform the data in their grid by reorganizing rows and columns, creating dynamic cross-tabulations of data.
This makes it possible to analyze data from different angles and gain insights that would be difficult to see in the default grid view.

## Quick start

Pivoting is enabled by default and can be accessed through the icon in the toolbar.
In the demo below, the pivot panel is already open and some pivoting parameters have been set.
Use the **Pivot** switch at the top of the panel to toggle pivoting off and on.
You can drag and drop existing columns in the **Rows**, **Columns**, and **Values** dropdown menus to change how the data is pivoted.

{{"demo": "GridPivotingMultipleValues.js", "bg": "inline", "defaultCodeOpen": false}}

## Understanding pivoting

Pivoting transforms your data by reorganizing it along three key dimensions: rows, columns, and values.

> ### Non-pivoted data

Reviewer 4: I think we may not need a new section. 
We could use the following demo to complement the overview.

```suggestion

```

> "Non-pivoted data" refers to the data as it's presented in the Data Grid before pivoting.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
```

> The demo below shows the non-pivoted dataset used throughout this doc to illustrate key pivoting features.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
You can try the given example in the following demo. The demo's flat dataset is used throughout this page to showcase key pivoting features.
```

{{"demo": "GridNonPivoted.js", "bg": "inline", "defaultCodeOpen": false}}

> ### Rows

Reviewer 4: I love that we have sections going deep on the concepts.

What I wonder is if we should move it to another page, so returning users don't have to always scroll through this content to reach the meat of the doc page.

Reviewer 4: That's nice! Thank you!

> The **Rows** menu defines how the data will be grouped vertically after pivoting.

Reviewer 4: I'm finding this a bit confusing. For example, the concept of "grouped vertically" is kinda hard to grasp like this.
Maybe what we need is really a picture mapping the data grid in pivoting state, showcasing what is rows, values and columns.
perhaps something along the lines:
<img width="735" alt="pivoting-explanation" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/97ef9105-fd12-4b43-8009-8ee37962fc2a" />

Author: Added in https://deploy-preview-9877--material-ui-x.netlify.app/x/react-data-grid/pivoting/#rows

### Controlled pivoting

For fully controlled pivoting state, you can use the following props:

- Pivot model:
  - `pivotModel`: Controls the current pivot configuration.
  - `onPivotModelChange`: Callback fired when the pivot model changes.
- Pivot mode toggle:
  - `pivotActive`: Controls whether pivot mode is active.
  - `onPivotActiveChange`: Callback fired when the pivot mode changes between active and inactive.
- Pivot panel:
  - `pivotPanelOpen`: Controls whether the pivot panel is open.
  - `onPivotPanelOpenChange`: Callback fired when the pivot panel is opened or closed.

{{"demo": "GridPivotingControlled.js", "bg": "inline", "defaultCodeOpen": false}}

## Using fields in the pivot model multiple times

While this is not supported yet, we are working to bring this feature to the Data Grid.

## Disable pivoting

To disable pivoting, set the `disablePivoting` prop to `true`:

```tsx
<DataGridPremium disablePivoting />
```

## Derived columns in pivot mode

In pivot mode, it's often useful to group data by a year or quarter.
The Data Grid automatically generates year and quarter columns for each **Date** column for this purpose.

> In the demo below, the **Transaction Date** column is represented by additional columns in pivot mode: **Transaction Date (Year)** and **Transaction Date (Quarter)**:

Reviewer 4: I think we should keep using the example from sales you started the page with. 

It's a good example of the pain point, now that the flat dataset doesn't come with Quarter column.

```suggestion
For example, the sales dataset we've been using throughout the examples has a "Quarter" column, but often in real applications, each sale would have a precise Transaction date, like in the following demo.

The **Transaction Date** column is represented by additional columns in pivot mode: **Transaction Date (Year)** and **Transaction Date (Quarter)**:
```

{{"demo": "GridPivotingFinancial.js", "bg": "inline", "defaultCodeOpen": false}}

### Custom derived columns

Use the `getPivotDerivedColumns` prop to customize derived columns.
This prop is called for each original column and returns an array of derived columns, or `undefined` if no derived columns are needed.

{{"demo": "GridGetPivotDerivedColumns.js", "bg": "inline", "defaultCodeOpen": true}}

## Sticky column groups

Depending on the pivot mode, some column groups might exceed the width of the Data Grid viewport.
To improve the user experience, you can make these column groups "sticky" so that the column group labels remain visible while scrolling horizontally.

> The demo below illustrates how to do this using the `sx` prop to apply the necessary styles:

Reviewer 4: Maybe we could also include the quick snippet for copying and pasting?

{{"demo": "GridPivotingMovies.js", "bg": "inline", "defaultCodeOpen": false}}

## Advanced demo

> {{"demo": "GridPivotingCommodities.js", "bg": "inline", "defaultCodeOpen": false}}

Reviewer 4: I loved that the Rows column is sticky in this demo, and I'd say most use cases will likely benefit from that.
I believe we should have a follow up issue to make this an out-of-the-box feature for pivoting. (obviously with ways to turn it off).

title: Data Grid - Pivoting
---

# Data Grid - Pivoting [<span class="plan-premium"></span>](/x/introduction/licensing/#premium-plan 'Premium plan') 🧪

<p class="description">Rearrange rows and columns to view data from multiple perspectives.</p>

Pivoting allows you to transform your data grid by reorganizing rows and columns, creating dynamic cross-tabulations of your data.
This feature enables users to analyze data from different angles and gain insights that would be difficult to see in a normal data grid view.

:::warning
The pivoting feature is currently in preview and the API is subject to change.
You can enable it using the `experimentalFeatures` prop:

```tsx
<DataGridPremium experimentalFeatures={{ pivoting: true }} />
```

:::

## Quick start

The pivoting feature is enabled by default and can be accessed from the toolbar.

> {{"demo": "GridPivotingMultipleValues.js", "bg": "inline", "defaultCodeOpen": false}}

Reviewer: It seems like the selection state is shared between the pivot and non-pivot mode. I think it's because the row selection doesn't support the `exportState()` pipe processor.

https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/be2f8b82-9257-4fcf-b4d0-3d68fa42a79e

Does it make sense to add a `exportState()` pipe processor and reset the selection state on pivot mode enable?

Reviewer: This issue is also related to the non-pivoted data that we maintain in the state.

Here’s the row tree state before and after enabling pivoting in [this](https://deploy-preview-9877--material-ui-x.netlify.app/x/react-data-grid/pivoting/#quick-start) demo (with only "Product" in "Rows"):
![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/5d8a88c5-7d64-4dec-9bbb-0ac6ffdcff78)

As you can see, even after enabling pivot mode, the original (non-pivoted) rows remain in the state. Because of this, when a row is selected, `rowSelectionPropagation` kicks in and treats the non-pivoted rows as descendants of the “parent” rows introduced by pivoting — causing unexpected selections.

I could think of the following for this PR to be followed up later in other ones.
1. Reset the `rowSelectionModel` when turning pivot mode on and reverting back the previous value on pivot mode off.
2. Force disable (`propsOverrides`) the row selection propagation for pivot mode for now (i.e. set it `{ parents: false, descendants: false }`) until we fix the issue mentioned above.

Wdyt?

Author: Resetting row selection when pivot is turned on sounds good to me, done in [`53c8290` (#9877)](https://github.com/mui/mui-x/pull/9877/commits/53c82901e2ecd43b3be2e479c5c19a6c7cd9c346)

These are typically numeric fields that can be aggregated (summed, averaged, counted, etc.).
For example, you might want to see the sum of `sales` for each combination of row and column.

{{"demo": "GridPivotingValues.js", "bg": "inline", "defaultCodeOpen": false}}

If multiple fields are selected for values, the each field will add a new aggregated column to the pivot data grid.
For example, if you pivot by `sales` and `profit` values, the pivot data grid will have two aggregated columns: `sales` and `profit`.

### Columns

**Columns** define how your data will be grouped horizontally.
Each unique value in the fields you select for columns will create a new column group in the pivot data grid.
For example, if you pivot by `region`, each unique region will become a column group in your pivot data grid.

{{"demo": "GridPivotingColumns.js", "bg": "inline", "defaultCodeOpen": false}}

If multiple fields are selected for columns, the columns will be grouped in the order of the selected fields.
For example, if you pivot by `region` and `quarter` columns, each unique combination of region and quarter will become a column in your pivot data grid.

### Pivoting in action

> In the demo below, we pivot a dataset of sales to have `product` and `size` fields as **rows**, `region` and `quarter` fields as **columns**, and `sales` and `profit` fields as aggregated **values**.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
In the demo below, we want to check our sales per region for each quarter and for each product size that we have. To get that, we pivot a dataset of sales to have `product` and `size` fields as **rows**, `region` and `quarter` fields as **columns**, and `sales` and `profit` fields as aggregated **values**.
```

Can be something different. The point is to explain why would you want to set it up like this

    field: string;
    aggFunc: string;
    hidden?: boolean;
  }>;
}
```

### Initialize pivoting

The easiest way to initialize pivoting is with an uncontrolled mode using the `initialState` prop.
You can initialize the pivot model, pivot panel visibility, and enable the pivot mode:

```tsx
<DataGridPremium
  initialState={{ pivoting: { model: pivotModel, enabled: true, panelOpen: true } }}
/>
```

{{"demo": "GridPivotingInitialState.js", "bg": "inline", "defaultCodeOpen": false}}

### Controlled pivoting

For fully controlled pivoting state, there are the following controlled props:

- Pivot model:
  - `pivotModel`: Controls the current pivot configuration.
  - `onPivotModelChange`: Callback fired when the pivot model changes.
- Pivot mode toggle:
  - `pivotEnabled`: Controls whether pivoting is enabled.
  - `onPivotEnabledChange`: Callback fired when pivoting is enabled/disabled.
- Pivot panel:
  - `pivotPanelOpen`: Controls whether the pivot panel is open.
  - `onPivotPanelOpenChange`: Callback fired when the pivot panel is opened/closed.

{{"demo": "GridPivotingControlled.js", "bg": "inline", "defaultCodeOpen": false}}

## Using fields in the pivot model multiple times

> While this is not supported yet, we are working to bring this feature to the Data Grid.

Reviewer 5: this can be updated to have a warning (usual UI for unsupported scenarios inside a feature)

Reviewer: Or link to an issue which users can upvote.

Reviewer 2: yeah, let's replace this with the boilerplate warning copy we use elsewhere for this situation.

title: Data Grid - Pivoting
---

# Data Grid - Pivoting [<span class="plan-premium"></span>](/x/introduction/licensing/#premium-plan 'Premium plan') 🧪

<p class="description">Rearrange rows and columns to view data from multiple perspectives.</p>

Pivoting allows you to transform your data grid by reorganizing rows and columns, creating dynamic cross-tabulations of your data.
This feature enables users to analyze data from different angles and gain insights that would be difficult to see in a normal data grid view.

:::warning
The pivoting feature is currently in preview and the API is subject to change.
You can enable it using the `experimentalFeatures` prop:

```tsx
<DataGridPremium experimentalFeatures={{ pivoting: true }} />
```

:::

## Quick start

The pivoting feature is enabled by default and can be accessed from the toolbar.

> 

Author: > our best practices for style dictate formatting UI text in bold and following the existing capitalization unless it's inconsistent across the UI

So it's used properly here, right?

{{"demo": "GridPivotingMultipleValues.js", "bg": "inline", "defaultCodeOpen": false}}

## Understanding the pivoting concepts

Pivoting transforms your data by reorganizing it along three key dimensions: **rows**, **columns**, and **values**.

### Non-pivoted data

> The non-pivoted data is the data that you start with.
> It is the data that you see in the Data Grid before you pivot it.

Reviewer 2: Ah I see, in that case maybe it makes sense to state that directly so readers like me will understand why we're showing this demo here.

```suggestion
"Non-pivoted data" refers to the data as it's presented in the Data Grid before pivoting.
The demo below shows the non-pivoted dataset used throughout this doc to illustrate key pivoting features.
```

{{"demo": "GridNonPivoted.js", "bg": "inline", "defaultCodeOpen": false}}

### Rows

**Rows** define how your data will be grouped vertically.
Each unique value in the fields you select for rows will create a separate row in the pivot data grid.

> For example, if you pivot by `product`, each unique product name will become a row in your pivot data grid.

Reviewer 2: I lean toward the first option with my edits, and my reasoning is that the UI text is what the reader will see first when they move from the text to the demo. When your eyes are primed with **Product** you'll find it in the UI right away, whereas `product` would require a few clicks and some digging around in the code sample below that to find.

I would reserve `product` for situations where you're specifically referring to the code, which I think are much less common throughout this doc. It seems to me that most of the text like this is actually referring to the UI text rather than the code.

If multiple fields are selected for columns, the columns will be grouped in the order of the selected fields.
For example, if you pivot by `region` and `quarter` columns, each unique combination of region and quarter will become a column in your pivot data grid.

### Pivoting in action

In the demo below, we want to check our sales by region and quarter for each product and size available.
To get that, we pivot a dataset of sales to have `product` and `size` fields as **rows**, `region` and `quarter` fields
as **columns**, and `sales` and `profit` fields as aggregated **values**.

{{"demo": "GridPivotingMultipleValues.js", "bg": "inline", "defaultCodeOpen": false}}

## Getting started with pivoting

### Pivot model

The pivot model is a configuration object that defines rows, columns, and values of the pivot data grid:

```tsx
interface GridPivotModel {
  rows: Array<{
    field: string;
    hidden?: boolean;
  }>;
  columns: Array<{
    field: string;
    sort?: 'asc' | 'desc';
    hidden?: boolean;
  }>;
  values: Array<{
    field: string;
    aggFunc: string;
    hidden?: boolean;
  }>;
}
```

### Initialize pivoting

> The easiest way to initialize pivoting is with an uncontrolled mode using the `initialState` prop.

Author: Haha, true! Also, using the word "easy" in the context of pivoting feels like an oxymoron 😅

You can initialize the pivot model, pivot panel visibility, and enable the pivot mode:

```tsx
<DataGridPremium
  initialState={{ pivoting: { model: pivotModel, enabled: true, panelOpen: true } }}
/>
```

{{"demo": "GridPivotingInitialState.js", "bg": "inline", "defaultCodeOpen": false}}

### Controlled pivoting

For fully controlled pivoting state, there are the following controlled props:

- Pivot model:
  - `pivotModel`: Controls the current pivot configuration.
  - `onPivotModelChange`: Callback fired when the pivot model changes.
- Pivot mode toggle:
  - `pivotActive`: Controls whether pivot mode is active.
  - `onPivotActiveChange`: Callback fired when pivot mode is active/inactive.
- Pivot panel:
  - `pivotPanelOpen`: Controls whether the pivot panel is open.

>   - `onPivotPanelOpenChange`: Callback fired when the pivot panel is opened/closed.

Reviewer 2: avoid slashes as shorthand for "or"

```suggestion
  - `onPivotPanelOpenChange`: Callback fired when the pivot panel is opened or closed.
```

{{"demo": "GridPivotingControlled.js", "bg": "inline", "defaultCodeOpen": false}}

## Using fields in the pivot model multiple times

While this is not supported yet, we are working to bring this feature to the Data Grid.

## Disable pivoting

> To disable the pivoting feature, set the `disablePivoting` prop to `true`:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To disable pivoting, set the `disablePivoting` prop to `true`:
```

```tsx
<DataGridPremium disablePivoting />
```

## Derived columns in pivot mode

In pivot mode, it's often useful to group data by a year or quarter.

> Data Grid automatically generates year and quarter columns for each `date` column.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The Data Grid automatically generates year and quarter columns for each **Date** column for this purpose.
```

> In the demo below, the `transactionDate` column is represented by additional columns in the pivot mode: `transactionDate-year` and `transactionDate-quarter`:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In the demo below, the **Transaction Date** column is represented by additional columns in pivot mode: **Transaction Date (Year)** and **Transaction Date (Quarter)**:
```

{{"demo": "GridPivotingFinancial.js", "bg": "inline", "defaultCodeOpen": false}}

### Custom derived columns

> To customize the derived columns, use the `getPivotDerivedColumns` prop.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Use the `getPivotDerivedColumns` prop to customize derived columns.
```

> It is called for each original column and should return an array of derived columns, or `undefined` if no derived columns are needed.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This prop is called for each original column and returns an array of derived columns, or `undefined` if no derived columns are needed.
```

{{"demo": "GridGetPivotDerivedColumns.js", "bg": "inline", "defaultCodeOpen": true}}

## Sticky column groups

Depending on the pivot mode, some column groups might exceed the width of the Data Grid viewport.

> To improve the user experience, you can make these column groups "sticky" so that the column group labels are visible while scrolling horizontally.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To improve the user experience, you can make these column groups "sticky" so that the column group labels remain visible while scrolling horizontally.
```

> In the demo below, the `sx` prop is used to make the column groups sticky:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The demo below illustrates how to do this using the `sx` prop to apply the necessary styles:
```
